Abraham Lincoln (/ˈlɪŋkən/ LINK-ən; February 12, 1809 – April 15, 1865) was an American lawyer, politician, and statesman who served 
as the 16th president of the United States from 1861 until his assassination in 1865. Lincoln led the nation through the American Civil
 War and succeeded in preserving the Union, abolishing slavery, bolstering the federal government, and modernizing the U.S. economy.

Lincoln was born into poverty in a log cabin in Kentucky and was raised on the frontier, primarily in Indiana. He was self-educated and
 became a lawyer, Whig Party leader, Illinois state legislator, and U.S. Congressman from Illinois. In 1849, he returned to his successful
 law practice in central Illinois. In 1854, he was angered by the Kansas–Nebraska Act, which opened the territories to slavery, and he 
re-entered politics. He soon became a leader of the new Republican Party. He reached a national audience in the 1858 Senate campaign 
debates against Stephen A. Douglas. Lincoln ran for president in 1860, sweeping the North to gain victory. Pro-slavery elements in the 
South viewed his election as a threat to slavery, and Southern states began seceding from the Union. During this time, the newly formed 
Confederate States of America began seizing federal military bases in the south. Just over one month after Lincoln assumed the presidency,
 the Confederate States attacked Fort Sumter, a U.S. fort in South Carolina. Following the bombardment, Lincoln mobilized forces to 
suppress the rebellion and restore the Union.

Lincoln, a moderate Republican, had to navigate a contentious array of factions with friends and opponents from both the Democratic and
 Republican parties. His allies, the War Democrats and the Radical Republicans, demanded harsh treatment of the Southern Confederates. 
Anti-war Democrats (called "Copperheads") despised Lincoln, and irreconcilable pro-Confederate elements plotted his assassination. He 
managed the factions by exploiting their mutual enmity, carefully distributing political patronage, and by appealing to the American 
people. His Gettysburg Address came to be seen as one of the greatest and most influential statements of American national purpose. Lincoln
 closely supervised the strategy and tactics in the war effort, including the selection of generals, and implemented a naval blockade of 
the South's trade. He suspended habeas corpus in Maryland and elsewhere, and he averted British intervention by defusing the Trent Affair.
 In 1863, he issued the Emancipation Proclamation, which declared the slaves in the states "in rebellion" to be free. It also directed the
 Army and Navy to "recognize and maintain the freedom of such persons" and to receive them "into the armed service of the United States." 
Lincoln also pressured border states to outlaw slavery, and he promoted the Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution, which
s upon its ratification abolished slavery.